Alex, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Howdy, thanks so much for having me.
Yeah, it's fabulous to have you here.
I'm really excited to talk about databases.
Databases are so important for making your app work well,
making them fast.
It surprises me how many people have slow databases.
It doesn't make sense.
We're pretty big fans of databases around here, for sure.
Yeah, and fast ones as well, right?
As best we can.
That's right.
Well, DuckDB is certainly on the rise in terms of me hearing people talk about,
like, "Oh, have you heard DuckDB?
Have you seen DuckDB?
Have you worked with it?"
And I think it continues an interesting tradition of lots of low stress
near your application type of databases.
So it's going to be fun to dive into that, for sure.
Before we do, tell us about yourself.
Sure.
Well, thanks so much for having me.
Huge fan of the show.
I'm really excited to be here.
So I appreciate that.
I work at MotherDuck.
I'm a forward deployed software engineer, which is kind of a made up title.
A couple of companies use it, but it's really a customer facing software engineer.
So working closely with folks to see how MotherDuck fits in with all the rest of their stack.
So MotherDuck is a cloud data warehouse with DuckDB at its core.
So absolutely a huge part of what we do.
I also work part time for DuckDB Labs, which is our partner organization.
And I do blogging and some developer advocacy types of things for them.
And so it's a separate company based in Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
And they are database experts and researchers.
And they're kind of the stewards of the open source project.
Yeah.
Awesome.
What is a forward deployed engineer do?
Do you get called into big companies who want to adopt the technology and they say,
Hey, could you help us do this quicker or are they running in trouble?
And they're like, you said it was fast.
It's not fast.
Help.
Well, don't copy this every query so it'll be better.
There's quite a lot of variety.
I think there's definitely some aspects of, you know, hey, can you help me with this?
There's also aspects of as folks are getting started, they're kind of picking out the rest of the tools around the database.
So what BI tool should I use?
What orchestrator should I use?
And then, you know, we do get into some SQL optimization stuff like that.
So that's kind of the customer facing side.
That's the majority of the role.
There's also troubleshooting that goes along with it, as well as kind of feeding things back into the company,
being the voice of the customer saying, Hey, we've had three people hit this.
Is there a way we can build something different?
Yeah.
Like everyone thinks they should do it this way.
We need to change our docs or they want this particular feature and we don't have it.
Yeah.
Yep.
It's a good cycle that we've got going.
It sounds really fun.
It's a lot of fun.
The variety is my favorite part.
Yeah, exactly.
And you know, a lot of fun investigation, troubleshooting, you know,
got to reframe it as a scavenger hunt.
You know, it's fun.
Yeah.
Every day is like a box of chocolates, huh?
Oh yeah.
A little different all the time.
You know, you don't know what you're going to get.
I used to do in-person professional training.
You know, I'd travel to Chicago or New York or Beijing and I would show up Monday morning,
I folks, what are we, you know, what's the situation?
Obviously, I'd know what we're going to talk about, but it was still, it was
different every time.
Every week was different.
Sounds like it might be not, not so different from what you're doing.
Are a lot of these in-person things or are they mostly Zoom style?
It's Zoom style.
It's Zoom style, you know, just we work with a variety of folks, not, you know,
like a couple of really giant customers.
So with that variety means that I couldn't fly fast enough.
Yeah, for sure.
Or, you know, issues I've had as well as like three people on the team are in this city,
three people are in that other city and one is here.
It's like, even if you flew somewhere, you would only be, you'd still be on Zoom.
So you might as well just be on Zoom.
Definitely, definitely.
Absolutely.
The world we live in.
And well, I mean, that's a blessing, honestly,
to not have to fly to all these places as well as just be able to pop in and
out, right?
I mean, this work from home story.
It's amazing.
It's only getting better all the time.
So let's talk DuckDB and databases.
I think maybe setting a bit of a mental model.
A lot of folks are familiar with SQLite, right?
Yeah, absolutely.
And so SQLite is a lot of
library, not a server that you can use that then plugs into your application,
works on a local file rather than a certain thing you run in another VM or however you,
you know, there's not a managed SQLite.
Not that I know.
I know maybe there's a managed SQLite.
I don't know of one.
There are.
Are there?
Yeah, there's a bunch of cool stuff that you can do if you have it.
A database that's just part of your application instead of somewhere else.
You know, another one that I just ran across is Mocha dash pie or there's no
dash pie, which is a Python wrapper around the I think it's rust Mocha caching thing.
But it's instead of being Redis or something like that, it's like an in memory.
Thing that you can run for sort of the same purpose.
So DuckDB sort of falls into that realm, right?
Yes, I think it's an in process database, just like you said.
So it's definitely a library, you know, it's a import DuckDB.
So it's not in the Python standard library, but it is on PyPI, just pip install DuckDB.
It's pre-compiled zero dependencies.
So it is super easy.
Basically anywhere you can get to pip, you can get DuckDB running.
So that could be your laptop.
That could be a big beefy server.
It could be a Lambda function.
It could be inside of your orchestrator, you know, in a GitHub action.
Kind of slots in everywhere.
That's part of the magic.
Presumably when you pip install DuckDB, it's just downloading a wheel for your
architecture, for your platform?
Absolutely.
Yep.
Pre-compiled all the accommodations.
Yeah, that's really good.
Yeah, if you just sit on the DuckDB.org homepage,
you can learn about it as it animates different messages to you.
DuckDB is a fast analytical database system, open source database system,
in-memory database system.
We'll see what else.
Yeah, portable.
So yeah, it works on most of the places, the main operating systems, right?
Yes.
Yep, it's all over.
Can I Raspberry Pi it?
I'd imagine the answer is yes.
You can.
Can I circuit Python it?
Probably not right.
You can do iPhone and Android. There's a Swift client so you can build iPhone apps and
Oh, really?
It works as well. So yeah, you could do that. It works in your browser with WebAssembly.
It'll work with Pyodide in the browser as well. So it really goes all over.
Oh, that's really cool. Yeah, one of the things that I said people are doing interesting stuff
with and in mind with SQLite is I saw some folks suggesting using SQLite in the browser
instead of local storage and like the local, like all the JavaScripty things. And
could I do that with DuckDB?
You could definitely do that with DuckDB. I think the use case is slightly different,
but that's sort of the benefit is you can use both. So
definitely could talk a bit more about the differences, but I'd say
in general, a good mental model for DuckDB is kind of
a from scratch separate project from SQLite, but taking a lot of the lessons
and learnings about what makes people love SQLite and bringing that into the
analytical realm. And that's really instead of inserting and updating tons of tiny
transactions all the time really fast. It's big bulk operations, you know,
aggregate a billion rows, join a billion rows to a billion rows, that type of thing.
Yeah, doing that in memory in JavaScript is not that great.
No.
Doing that in memory in Python is not that great. But it sounds a little bit more
like vector programming in the sense of kind of like
you would do with pandas or pollers, right? You wouldn't loop over,
you shouldn't loop over a pandas data frame processing each item. You should issue
vector operations that apply to every row, like multiply this column by two,
rather than for every C in call, you know, whatever, like looping over.
Yes. So it is, it is exactly what you said. It's designed for that. It's vectorized
execution. So it's a little different than pandas. It's a, you know, pollers is a bit more
similar.
Where instead pandas will process a whole column at a time.
And that works a lot better than one row at a time until your columns get too big and then
it crashes. Yeah. So what DuckDB does is it does it in chunks of about 2000 rows at a time.
And so that way you get all the benefits of your modern CPU, you know, hierarchy,
your caches, all that, where it's just pumping data through. But you also conserve memory and you
can not get into issues with that. I will also say it's technically we are an in-process
database, not an in-memory database.
Oh, sorry. If I meant, if I said in-memory, I meant in-process.
Yeah.
It's, it is, I, you know, very much an interchangeable word, like in English.
We just are very specific about it in database land.
No, you do. And you do support in-memory databases.
Yes.
But that's not the same as in-process. Yeah, sorry. In-process is what I meant.
Oh, no problem. All I mean to say there is, you know,
you don't need to limit yourself to your size of RAM. You know, you can solve one terabyte
problems on your laptop with DuckDB, no problem.
Really?
Yes. It handles larger than memory data, both streaming from disk. So it'll just read just
the pieces it needs as it goes, and even in the intermediates. So let's say you join two tables
together and you, you know, multiply the number of rows. It'll send things to disk as it gets memory
pressure close to your memory limit. So it's a lot of effort has been put into that in the last year or
so. So it's working pretty smooth now. Yeah, I can imagine that that's super important.
So I'm really looking forward to talking about schemas, indexes, those kinds of things,
which sound like they may play important roles here. But you talked about these different ways in which
you can use DuckDB. Looking through the documentation, it looks like it works with not just Python, but quite
a few platforms or languages.
Yes, somewhere north of 15. So Python's the most popular way to use DuckDB. We've got some
really tight integrations with data frame libraries, which we can definitely talk more about.
There's a lot of Java use out there. So JDBC, you've got a JDBC driver, you can use it in
JavaScript, both in the browser with WASM, or on the server with Node, popular Node package. You can also do
Go, Rust, C++, C. I think there's a community driven Ruby client, really all over the place.
Okay.
.NET, C#, you can use it from .NET, all over.
Yeah. Yeah, that's awesome. And I'm guessing it's interchangeable, the file?
Yes. So just like SQLite files are designed to be read for a long time, they're very portable.
DuckDB just kind of reached the 1.0 milestone in June. So super excited about that.
And with that, promised stability with the file format. And that means that we expect for the
next somewhere around five years to have your DuckDB files be totally compatible, where you can read
a five-year-old file five years from now type thing. Which means it's like SQLite in that you can fit all your
tables and all the relationships between them all in one file. So that's one nice thing about
SQLite. You can email the whole database. You can do the same with DuckDB. But DuckDB is going to store it a
lot more compactly if you've got a lot of data. Oh, really? Okay. You guys have worked a lot on the file format?
It's, again, taking inspiration from SQLite, the format is very separate. And in databases, you kind of have
a pretty hard fork in the road pretty early on in your architecture, which is you want
to be row-based or do you want to be column-based? And row-based is SQLite and column-based would be
your pandas, your pollers, and most of your cloud data warehouses, your snowflakes, that type of thing.
And once you go column-based, suddenly your compression is amazing because you store data
that's very similar right next to each other. So you can really compress it. Your dates are back-to-back
Instead of a date column, string column, integer column in a row-based store,
they don't compress well. So we can get somewhere around 5x the compression typically.
Okay. That's really great. And you could take this file and you could put it
into S3 or use it with some sort of Jupyter notebook, right? And just, they could just grab the file and run
with it and it's all the data, yeah? Yes. Object stores are really the
the name of the game there. You can even work with a file on object store and read it without
having to download the whole file first. So DuckDB supports something like SQLite in that it's got
this attach syntax. So you can say, "Hey, I want you to attach this file and then just read the pieces
of it that I actually query," which is pretty slick. Yeah, that's super slick.
All right. Let's-- let me scroll down here and let's talk about maybe using it from
Python. Give us a sense of like what working with DuckDB is like here.
You bet. So you've got your pip install DuckDB,
which will download that pre-compiled binary. It's like 20 or 30 megabytes, so pretty close to instant.
Yeah. So you can do DuckDB.sql. And then that-- within that function, you just pass in a string
of your SQL statement and it'll execute. It's really that simple. And so it follows the DB API if you
want, so you can get back your typical pupils. Or you can say .df at the end and get back a pandas data
frame. Or .pl, get pullers, all kinds of stuff. Yeah, I saw that there's a lot of to and from the
popular data science libraries, which seems really nice. You work in your data science library,
or maybe run a query and get a subset of your data. And then maybe plot that with Plotly or Altair or
pass it along to other things that expect the data frame, right?
Yes, exactly. A lot of the DuckDB ethos is don't ask folks to ship their data necessarily
somewhere else. Don't ask them to change their workflow dramatically to use a database. Meet folks
right where they are. And that means you can have one line of code be in your data frame library of
choice, you know, pandas, pullers, or arrow. And then a line of code in DuckDB, and then you're right
back in your data frame in the next line. So it fits really wherever you want. It's a great fit if you
want to throw some SQL at a problem. Some problems are easier to formulate in SQL, I think, than in
data frame libraries and vice versa. But also, it's-- some libraries, it's harder to scale larger than memory.
And DuckDB does have a lot of nice performance under the hood. So maybe the hardest
part of your workflow, you can slide in DuckDB and make the minimum change to get it working.
Yeah, well, it seems to me like maybe you put all of the data into DuckDB,
Yeah, well, it's a good thing. And then you can ask questions, which result in Python
data science objects that then you can work on where those questions result in, give me the stuff for
this state or this time period or something like that where it's a reasonable amount of data. But
if you tried to just load it all, then it would say no.
I think that's a great way to go about it for sure.
Another common workflow is to do some similar things, but with Parquet files or CSVs or JSON. So
in the same way you can store a lot of your data in DuckDB, you can periodically write chunks out to Parquet,
or read in from Parquet, all that type of stuff too.
Yeah. Tell people what Parquet is. I know it comes from Pi Arrow or the Arrow project,
right? Where does it come from?
Definitely.
I know they use it. I don't know if they came up with it, but yeah.
They definitely collaborated and were a big part of it. So it's a community developed open
format. It's Apache Parquet. So it's open source, community driven, and it's a columnar format.
So instead of storing things by rows, it's columnar storage, and it's chunked columnar
storage. So it's sort of like somewhere around every million rows or so, you kind of write out another
chunk. And it ends up being a really good format to store large amounts of data in the cloud. And it's
typically what's underneath a data lake or a data lake house. The vast majority of those have Parquet
under the hood. We love the Parquet format. At DuckDB, we read it and write it. We have a custom from scratch
reader, custom from scratch writer for it. We actually prefer our own format, given the choice
as well. Parquet's been around for a decade or so at this point. And we've added a few things over time
into DuckDB that are new.
Yeah, Parquet is one of those things that Pandas 2.0 supports it, right? Polar supports it.
It's pretty universal. So it might be a good way to get data from that you've worked on
before into DuckDB.
Yes, it's great. I think, you know, most universal,
CSV, most difficult, also CSV. Parquet is a really great compromise there.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Hold on. My computer is lagging and distracting me. I apologize.
One sec, scroll, scroll.
Alex Bialik:
Yeah. So DuckDB works well, it sounds like, for the data science story. Like, it's built for the data science story. If I was wanting to store relational data,
you know, maybe I've already got DuckDB working for something like, you know, do I necessarily want to bring
SQLite into the story as well and have these two things? Does it, is it possible to, say,
do relational type things with DuckDB?
Yes, that's a great question. So I think DuckDB is trying to bring the best of both. It is a full relational database,
and as well as supporting some of the, you know, data science workflows that you typically in the past
would have been doing in a data frame. So DuckDB is an analytical system, not transactional. So it's not going
to be the fastest at doing individual row operations, but it supports them all. And it supports them with full
asset transactions that you'd expect from a database where you won't get database corruption,
even if your computer cuts out. You know, it's, it's got that kind of robustness that you expect from
a database. So part of the story, though, is that with an, with an analytical database, it's typically
not your only database, unless you're doing data science work. If you're building an application,
you're going to want a transactional database for, you know, saving your, you know, when a customer places
is in order, you know, you know, all that type of transactional stuff is still critical. So typically,
DuckDB is going to be layered in addition. And the interoperability story there with DuckDB is pretty,
pretty fantastic. You can actually read SQLite files directly with DuckDB. And it's going to be,
if you're doing any sort of advanced processing on them, it's going to be a lot quicker
in DuckDB. You can even read Postgres databases, you can read MySQL databases,
Oh, wow.
There's a community extension to read BigQuery. So it's, it's really a universal Swiss army knife
in a lot of ways to read from those operational data stores, but to do those analytical tasks,
you know, look at all my orders, what was the most popular five products? You know, that that's going
to be a tough query for a transactional system, but bread and butter for DuckDB.
So when you say read from, let's say Postgres, does that, does that import it into a table
in DuckDB or does it translate the queries over to the underlying data system? Like what's happening
there?
That's a great question. We are communicating with Postgres. So we're not importing everything. We're
sending the query to it and we're reading all the data. Typically that's going to be sparing the table
or forming a view from Postgres. And then after that point, bring it into the DuckDB engine for,
for subsequent processing, but you don't have to migrate all your data. It's, it's kind of a data
virtualization is one of the buzzwords it's been around a little, but you know, it's getting to get some
of the benefits of analytical performance without having to move your data first. It'll definitely
be more performant if you put it in an analytical format, like Parquet, like DuckDB, like a analytical
database, but you get a big fraction of that benefit with the engine part, which is the, the vectorized
engine of doing things 2000 rows at a time, instead of one row at a time. That's a lot of it.
Yeah. That's a huge benefit.
It's almost like microservices for databases. You can collect the things together, but the benefit
would be, you know, that if you have an operational database that is, it's getting read to and written
to and read from in real time. When you ask questions about it, it's, it's using that real time data. It's
not, well, we did an export last night and here's what we know, right? You can just get more live data,
I guess. Yes. That's definitely a use case for that. You can kind of go either end of that spectrum.
You can use that as an easy way to import, or you can pull it live, or you can kind of do midway and say
for any data older than an hour, use what I extracted, but grab the last hour right out of
the operational database and get the best of both. Oh, wow. Okay. Yeah. That'd be pretty wild, wouldn't it?
So you say that you all have the simplest or friendliest SQL syntax. What's the story with that?
Sure. I think a lot of that is around part of the origin story of DuckDB is reaching out to the data
science community and, and hearing feedback that we've invented this entire other thing called data
frames because we didn't love databases. Yeah, exactly. They didn't answer the questions we
wanted or whatever. Yeah. Right. It was, there was a lot of friction and, you know, if you've been,
you know, folks have installed Postgres and set it up, there's a lot more to it than, you know,
import pandas as PD. It's, it's just a different level of, of hassle that you have to do. The SQL syntax is no
different. You know, SQL is an old language, much older than Python. And it's got a lot of very
interesting behavior that, you know, in, by modern standards is very different. So with DuckDB, we've
really pushed the envelope in a lot of ways. Nice. Well, you know, many of the things that relational
databases were built for and when they're designed, this was the seventies and they had different, you know,
memory was expensive. Disc was expensive. So they made these trade-offs in that world, right?
Yes. And it's absolutely. There's definitely some aspects of SQL where it's been around a long time.
So it'll be around forever. But what DuckDB is trying to do is have it not be frozen in time
forever and really push the whole language forward. So there's a couple of cool ways. The, the syntax
itself is designed to be both easier to use and also push it into areas that are, are new and
different for databases. So easier to use, for example, in SQL, if you want to aggregate, you kind
of typically need two ingredients. You need an aggregation function, like a sum or a max or an average.
And then you want to group by clause to say, what's the level of detail I want to group at? Do I want to
group by customer or customer and order? You know, what, what level of detail am I looking at?
DuckDB can actually infer that level of detail with group by all and just say, whichever columns you're looking at,
if you're looking at the customer ID and you're getting an average, okay, I'll just aggregate it
up at customer ID level for you. And so it cuts out a whole clause of SQL. You basically never have to
worry about the group by clause ever again. Just put the keyword all, you're good to go.
I love it because the group by clause is hard. It's anytime you have to edit something in two
places, just you're already in trouble, right? I mean, just, you know, the don't repeat yourself is
very valuable. Yeah. Yeah. The joins and the group buys and the whole aggregation pipeline stuff,
which is incredibly powerful, especially in analytical databases like DuckDB, but also hard.
Yes, absolutely. And I think obviously anything we can do to reduce the friction there is helpful.
So we are talking about the friendly SQL dialect. I'll throw a teaser in there to say there are ways
to use DuckDB without SQL as well in very Pythonic ways. So you really can have it both ways if you want.
Okay. What about ORMs? Is there a concept of a ORM for DuckDB?
I'd have to check exactly which ones support it. But I know at MotherDuck, we're working on,
you know, a TypeScript ORM that'll support DuckDB SQLize. I'd have to check which other ones are out
there that support it. But nothing in principle really stops it. We support the fundamental things
you need like transactions, like, you know, all the other pieces you need.
Yeah. Basically, if it runs on pure SQL, then, you know, you should ORMs are mostly about,
I'm querying against classes, and then I'm going to turn that into SQL for you. And then
the things that come back, I'm going to turn them into objects, right? Like, I feel like both sides of
that would be fine. Yes. And it is, you know, it's a relational database. So it's not,
there are many, it'll look a lot very similar to the ORMs themselves. So it should be,
should be very compatible. Yeah, it seems, it seems possible. It seems totally possible. All right.
So maybe let's talk through a little bit of the ways of working with DuckDB through maybe like connecting,
running some queries, updating. But let me first ask you, what does, what does a schema look like?
If, for example, if I'm going to work with Postgres or SQLite, I need to run create scripts to create
the tables and the indices and that kind of stuff before I can even talk to it, generally speaking.
Is that needed for DuckDB? It doesn't look like it from the examples that I've seen, but how does that work?
Yeah. And I think in those other databases, there are some ways where you don't necessarily have to do
that. And DuckDB follows that same approach where it can automatically create tables for you based on
the query that you pipe into it. So you create a table as the result of another SQL statement, and it will
just automatically create that table with the data types that you pass through. So one key note,
if folks are really know a lot about SQLite, one of the defining characteristics of it is that it is very
much non-typed as much as possible. DuckDB is very much more traditional in that it does have typing.
It does take full advantage of having nice numeric data types, date times that are true date times,
not strings. It'll do its best to auto convert for you. But it really does make it very easy. You
can just create a table as, for example, create table as select star from this parquet file. It can
really be that easy. It'll just auto create the table based on the parquet file.
Okay. Yeah, that's really neat. And a lot of those have their columns have data types and stuff,
right? Yes. And we have also invested quite a lot in our CSV reader as well. So the CSV reader,
we would consider to be up there with the best on the planet. It auto infers the data types by sniffing
the CSV to really deduce it. And it handles some seriously wacky CSV files.
Okay. I can see files. I mean, whatever you're imagining, it's worse.
It's worse than that. But DuckTV is okay and ready to handle it and making it easy. Because
it really aligns with the DuckTV ethos, which is a database shouldn't be extra work. It should be
saving you work. Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah. And most of the time, step one of a database is import your data. And a lot of databases,
that's not that easy to just import your data. No, it's not.
Especially if it's not exactly the format of that database, right? It's like, well, okay, I have a .SQL file.
It's a bunch of update statements. Sure, that's easy to import. But here's my CSV and actually you need to
transform it or whatever. Yeah.
Yes. There's a long tail of complexity there, but DuckTV is really trying to handle that and just make that first
experience using a database just straight out of the box really easy.
Yeah. So you have some interesting data ingestion. This is a good thing, not a bad thing.
Data ingestion options. It feels a little bit pandas-like. You have a read CSV, read parquet,
read JSON. And then it's just, as you sort of hinted there, it's like part of the database now and you
can ask it questions. Yes. So you can absolutely do that just with the read CSV and it'll import there.
You can also even just read it without importing. So for example, when we're running that read parquet,
it's lazily evaluated, much like Polar's or some of the other more modern data frame libraries are,
where it's building up this relation object that says, once you look at the results, start by reading
the parquet file and then process the next few steps. You could do something like read parquet, filter to
these things, aggregate up on these columns, and it will actually do all those operations together.
It'll optimize them to do them in the right order to pull the least amount of data. And then only at
that point will it, you know, materialize what it needs to. So the examples that you're looking at on
screen are, you know, DuckDB.SQL select star from a parquet file. You don't ever even have to read that part, you
know, write that parquet file into DuckDB format. It's just going to read it and return the results to you
straight as a pass through as an engine. That's really cool. So if it were a million lines of that,
I could just iteratively pull through it. Yes, it'll just chunk through it at nice low memory usage and
just, you know, pass those results out to you. And then if you process them also in batches, you can
keep your memory, you're super low and take advantage of DuckDB being a streaming engine and not bring it on
the memory. Right. Well, let's say I want to read a CSV file, but then put it into a persistent table
in DuckDB. What do I do for this? Yes, you could say, create table as my improved CSV table,
as select star from path to my CSV file. Will it copy over the schema? It will infer the schema as best as
it possibly can. And it will automatically define the schema for you. Nice. What's the nullability
story in your schema? I think, like get do you support nullability or are there things that cannot be
null? Yes, it's more traditional in the database and that everything can have a null value in the column.
I think in pandas, that was a little bit complicated by the fact that they were using numpy in some cases,
but extending beyond numpy and others. But in DuckDB, it's more of a traditional database story in that
you can have a null value wherever you choose, unless you define a table to say, this column is doesn't
allow nulls. Right. You can do that if you want. Yeah, I remember that was one of the things that caught
me out with SQLite. I think it doesn't support, I can't remember which way it went. It's been a while.
It doesn't support non-nullable columns, like everything is nullable or something like that.
And it was like, wait, why is this not failing when I put in this wrong data or something along those lines?
You know, SQLite is incredibly flexible and there's a lot of benefits to it. At times that can mean that
things pop up later in the life cycle than at the beginning, like you said. So with SQLite, you can,
you could put a number in a string column and a string column and a number column, you know,
and it'll, it'll mostly work until it doesn't work. DeckDB will, will, you know, be much more explicit
about that. But it offers a lot of tools where you, you can auto convert, where it'll auto convert for
you. So you kind of get the benefits without the cost. And it actually has what's called a union type,
where you can actually have one column that can have strings and numbers in it. If you know that you're
going to have a little bit of both. So really, best of all worlds, I'd say.
Yeah, I think that's more common in the data science data lake space. You got a bunch of
data, you pull it in, and then you're going to clean it up and work on it. And whereas in
maybe a relational database powering a web API, like, nope, users always have an email.
That's just how it is.
Right. Yes.
Okay, so I'm looking at some code on your documentation here about getting started with
Python for pandas. And I need some, I need some help. I need some help.
It says import DuckDB, import pandas as PD, this is all normal. And then it says pandas
DF, it's a variable equals PD dot data frames, so creates one. And here's where I need the help.
The next line is DuckDB dot SQL, select star in the quotes, pandas DF. What, how do those two things
connect? That's a great question. So you never like take the actual object of the data frame and
show it to DuckDB in any way, like you don't pass through a function or set of property or nothing.
Exactly. And this is the benefit of being an in-process database. We are in the same memory space
as Python, which means we can actually read the Python locals for its local variables. And DuckDB has
been built from the very beginning with this concept of interchangeability of storage format. That's why you can read
Parquet files or read CSV files, because we treat them as first class citizens in our, in our database. And data frames are no different. What we'll do first when we see a select statement come in, and it's got a table in there. In this case, it's pandas DF is the name of the table. First thing we'll do is, hey, do we have a physical duckDB table like that? Is there a table of that name? And if we don't find one, we don't give up, we keep looking, we say, okay, is there another object we know how to read with that name? And so we look in Python's local variables, there's a variable named pandas DF, and we check the
class name, what class name, what class name? What class is this? Is it pandas? Is it polars? Is it Apache arrow? And if it's one of those, we can treat it just like a table, and then run SQL right on top of it.
Pretty wild.
It's pretty wild.
I think one of the real values there is that you don't have to do, presumably, I'm presuming, you don't have to do a data conversion from pandas into whatever in-memory,
thing duckDB thinks is ideal, and then back.
That's a great question. So we, you definitely don't have to do it all at once. So pandas, sometimes it is Python objects under the hood, whereas duckDB is, you know, written in C++, so it will change some things, but it'll do it in chunks, like we're talking about, so it won't be, you know, all up front.
But for things like polars and arrow, in most data types, it's zero copy, where it's the same format. DuckDB has slightly different data formats, and Apache arrow is actually adjusted to align closer to duckDB in some of their format, like how they store strings.
So duckDB has really been one of the leading databases in terms of how it handles strings, and Apache arrow is also making those changes.
Yeah, that's super cool. You can't write back to these, can you?
You can't say, wait, you can, you can say update, like, the data frame variable, PD data frame, set, whatever, yeah?
So you, if you're updating the data frame, you will overwrite the whole data frame. But a duckDB table, you can run updates on that object, for sure.
Yeah.
But you can write, you know, data frames, for sure. So you can replace the whole thing.
Right, but I couldn't change the 172nd row of that data frame with a SQL query, or could I?
You would just be making a copy of the object.
Got it, got it. Yeah, yeah, that's what I thought. You would make the changes, but then you would return as data frame and make a copy of it.
Correct. We would return a different object in memory, but functionally, it would be the same, and duckDB is fast enough where it'd probably be quite performant still.
Yeah, probably fine, yeah. Okay, I'm not saying that it should be able to do, I'm just trying to figure out how far down this.
How far down, yeah, yeah.
How far down does it go? Yeah, so it does the same kind of magic with the locals, with Pyro and pullers and so on.
So there's different ways to get data back, and it doesn't really matter where it came from, if it came from pandas or duckDB files itself, or even just hard-coded SQL.
But you can say things like fetch all, which will return you Python objects, or .df will return you a pandas data frame, or different things, right?
Yes, yep, we've got .pl for polars, .arrow. You could do NumPy arrays if you'd like.
We also support outputting to TensorFlow tensors and PyTorch tensors, because those are NumPy under the hood in a lot of ways.
So we can output to that as well.
Okay, that's super cool.
Do I need to be worried about little Bobby tables, SQL injections?
We could definitely pass in parameters that will get escaped properly and all that.
With DuckDB, I think that, in general, we take the approach of being super flexible, but there's a lot of options to lock it down, should you choose.
So the select star from any CSV file on my hard drive, you could turn that off if you want, for example.
Likewise, with the data frames, you can disable that also.
Yeah, I guess what I'm asking more, is there a concept of a parameterized query, or something like that?
Yes, yes. So you can follow the same Python DV 2.0 kind of API spec.
You could do .execute, and pass in a query with placeholder parameters, and then pass in those as arguments.
So you can absolutely do that.
It tends to be not good for bulk ingestion.
The reason for that is Python objects just have a lot more...
Uh-oh.
Uh-oh, Alex, I lost your audio.
Did you possibly hit something that hit a mute button?
I did. Sorry. I'm back.
Okay. Sorry. Give us the...
You said it's not good for bulk ingestion. Let's go from there.
Yep. Yep. Sorry.
Oh, all good. That's on me.
So you can insert straight from Python objects with parameters.
It works really great. It's very convenient, but it's not great for bulk ingestion.
Inserting a million rows that way versus a million rows in a panache data frame,
it's going to be a couple orders of magnitude faster to do it through a data frame.
Yeah. Yeah, absolutely.
So if...
By default, if I just do WDB.SQL,
this is working in this...
correctly this time,
in-memory database.
Oh, yeah.
But if you create a connection to a file,
then that...
where you just call it whatever you want, right?
Like in your examples, you got file.db.
That will then start persisting to that file, right?
But it's pretty simple to do either.
Yes.
You're just changing the connection path.
And if you pass in no path, it'll be in memory.
Otherwise, you can point to a file.
And it's really that straightforward.
It'll save all your tables into that same file.
Nice and compressed in columnar format.
And then now the format is all stabilized.
You can throw that on an object store,
share it with anybody,
put it in your data lake,
anywhere you want it to go.
Can I read from objects or can I give it an S3 connection?
Yes, indeed.
You can read from any of the major clouds.
So AWS, Google, Azure.
You can read individual files
or actually it'll understand hierarchies of files.
So if you have like a top-level folder for a year
and a folder for month and day,
if you filter for,
I only want three days worth of data,
DuckDB will only read three files.
So it's pretty slick.
Oh, wow. That's wild.
Okay.
Yeah, that is really slick.
And you can even write out to those as well.
So you can actually write on the object stores too.
That's amazing, actually.
And a lot of less hyperscale clouds,
I don't know.
I was almost calling them lesser clouds,
but I think of almost as like even better clouds.
You know, DigitalOcean, Hetzner, Linode,
some of these smaller places,
a lot of them have their own object store
and the objects store API
is just a different connection string
for the S3 API, right?
So it sounds like you could probably get that to work as well.
Let's pass that.
I believe I've seen MinIO used,
which is even like self-hosted if you want.
So if it handles MinIO,
you can kind of put it wherever you want, I think.
Yeah, yeah, that's for sure.
MinIO is awesome.
I haven't got a chance to put MinIO
into any useful work,
but it's like a self-hosted S3, basically,
which is really cool.
Yeah, so I don't know.
It seems like a really neat system.
But it's also MinIO is complicated.
You know, it's not easy to set up and run.
It seems like there's a lot going on there.
So that's why I haven't done anything with it yet.
I'm like, this looks amazing.
Oh, this looks complicated.
What else am I going to do today?
I think S3 is pretty great.
Drop a file, read a file.
So it's not a bad starting point for quite a while.
Yeah, absolutely.
So with this connection object,
like if you want to have a persistent database, right,
you create a connection object,
and then it has basically the same API as the DuckDB itself.
So you can run SQL queries,
you can do table stuff on it, and so on.
What's the concurrency story with this thing?
So, for example, what if I try to use DuckDB in Flask,
and I have Flask running in G Unicorn,
and I say, G Unicorn, please use four worker processes,
and I try to talk to it?
It's a great question.
Am I going to be having a bad time,
or am I having a good time?
It depends a little bit.
But yes, there's some trade-offs.
There's reasons that there are databases that are in process
and that there are databases that are client-server.
And so whenever you want to write data to DuckDB,
you can only write data from within a single process.
And you'll open up a read-write connection,
and it will actually disallow any access from any other process,
and it'll be single-process access
while you're doing reads and writes.
It does handle multi-threading just fine,
so you can have multiple Python threads.
So you get nice parallel performance that way, no problem.
But it's all within the same memory space
because you're using threads.
So we're pretty excited about free threading coming soon in Python.
Yes.
Yeah, well, that's going to knock out the need for the web garden,
not the web farm, the web garden,
where you've got a bunch of these copies of the web server running in parallel
because they're all trying to have separate gills
so they can be more concurrent.
That's not the only reason, but that's a big reason in Python.
That's definitely a big reason.
So that we're excited about.
If you want to be read-only,
so since DuckDB is an analytical database,
and since we can read from files,
there are a lot of use cases that are read-only,
where if I'm reading from parquet files on an object store,
I might not be doing any right operations at all,
at which point multi-process access is totally fine
as long as you're in read-only mode for all of those processes.
I will add one big other thing to look into, though,
is where I work, which is Mother Duck.
So we're a cloud serverless data warehouse built around DuckDB,
and we'll handle the concurrency side.
So it's really taking this amazing single-player DuckDB experience
and bringing it into the cloud
as a full multiplayer cloud data warehouse experience
so you get concurrency,
you get automatic managed storage.
It's very efficient,
and you also get access control
and some of the things you associate with a large-scale database.
So that's the story.
If you need concurrency but you're using DuckDB,
I think Mother Duck is a great option.
Right.
So this is kind of DuckDB as a service.
Is that right?
That's definitely a key piece of it.
I think DuckDB is a huge part of what we do,
and it is the engine under the hood.
I think we are using that to really be meeting the use case
of being not just sort of a cloud hosting for DuckDB.
It's to really be a full data warehouse with DuckDB as the engine.
So a little bit of a distinction there,
but just as an organization could kind of use it
as opposed to just one person cloud hosting it,
something like that.
Yeah.
Well, it seems like a really, really great service.
And I guess it's worth calling out that DuckDB,
the thing that runs in your process is available on,
as an MIT licensed thing, right?
Which is, that's pretty amazing.
And you, I saw somewhere, I can't remember where I saw it,
but it's something like you'll promise to be MIT,
to stay MIT.
No rug pulling.
The rugs will stay.
Yes.
So it's a pretty cool kind of corporate structure.
And if you can say a cool corporate structure,
we'll see if we can get away with that.
But as far as corporate structures go, it's pretty cool, right?
So there's actually three organizations at play.
And one of them is a nonprofit foundation
called the DuckDB Foundation.
And they actually own the intellectual property for DuckDB.
And that is what ensures that it'll be MIT licensed forever
because it is not a company that owns DuckDB,
which is amazing.
So there is, like, it's not even possible to do a rug pull,
even if somebody wanted, which nobody does, right?
It's not even possible.
It's against the law, which is pretty cool.
So, yeah.
I guess maybe give people, I threw that out there.
There might be people who don't know what that means.
Oh, what a rug pull is?
Yes, exactly.
Yeah, what is that?
You know, certain products, once they're open source,
they begin to, they get funded in certain ways
to where they need to be, you know,
selling it as a product.
And at times that means that either they don't always
put everything back in open source
or there's different licensing models that get changed
so that the license is a little bit more restrictive
than it was in the past.
Kind of the typical maneuver there
for a couple of different companies has been around.
Amazon will just host your product
and then it's very hard to have your own business
if Amazon just hosts it.
So we're not in that situation with DuckDB
because it's open source forever.
But also Mother Duck is not just wrapping DuckDB.
We're innovating at that service layer
where with Mother Duck,
one of its secret sauce ingredients
is it's not just a cloud service.
When you connect to Mother Duck,
you have DuckDB running locally and in the cloud.
And one query, one Python statement
can actually run partially in the cloud
and partially on your laptop.
And we actually can,
we can choose the optimal location for that to run
based on your query plan.
We actually do that as a part of the optimization
to say, where's the most efficient place
for this to run?
And that's some serious secret sauce
that, you know,
it's not just wrapping,
you know, an open source solution and hosting it.
That gives some really nice benefits
for things like the local development experience.
You can develop locally at light speed
and then push to the cloud at the final step.
Or alternatively, kind of reverse the polarity.
Maybe your first step
is to bring everything down locally in a cache
and then do all kinds of data science processing on it.
So it's very convenient to have both local and cloud.
I see.
Kind of like we talked about writing a query
and then turn it into a data science object
and then asking questions.
This is a little bit like distributed versus local,
but staying within DuckDB.
It's definitely,
you get to use server-side compute
or local compute, however you'd like.
Yeah.
Super cool.
I love the idea of it.
It's a lot of fun.
We're doing a lot of fun things
and you got to have fun with it as well.
You know,
what do you call someone who works at Mother Duck?
A duckling.
That's the second most popular one.
We actually,
we're Mother Duckers, Michael.
Oh, okay.
Mother Duckers.
All right.
You got to have fun with it, right?
Otherwise,
it's all just ones and zeros at the end of the day, right?
You have to have fun with it.
Yeah.
You should.
I don't know.
Ducklings.
But Mother Duckers is good still.
I guess ducklings might send the wrong message.
They're all good.
Do you want to,
do you want to like sort of tough,
tough persona or facade,
or do you want to like,
you know,
coddled,
whatever?
No,
it's a great name.
It's like,
if you look at the branding on our website,
you know,
we're not going for like,
we're not like a super muscly duck,
you know,
in our element ridges.
We're definitely in the playful side.
And part of this,
because we really think that back in the big data era,
we believe the big data era is over here at Mother Duck.
And the reason for that is you no longer need 50 servers to answer your questions.
It turns out laptops are pretty daggone fast now.
Yeah.
And you can do a lot.
Even,
even if you're not able to handle it on a laptop,
how about one giant node on AWS?
Yeah.
You can rent a node with multiple terabytes of RAM.
Of RAM.
I mean,
you could do a lot,
right?
So at that point,
what is a single node?
You can kind of do,
do almost anything that you need.
So,
and as a result,
and single server versus distributed is way easier.
Yes.
It allows you to innovate a lot faster.
You can use better algorithms.
So in many cases,
it's actually just plain old faster to do it that way.
A lot of benefits,
but what we realized fundamentally at Mother Duck is,
in a lot of ways,
DuckDB as well.
The scale of data shouldn't be the most important thing anymore.
It should be how easy it is to use.
You should be able to do select star from a CSV.
You know,
it doesn't take scale to parse a CSV file in an intelligent way.
It takes elbow grease.
It takes innovation in terms of the algorithm,
but at the end of the day,
it's not about how big is your CSV file.
It's about how long did it take me to get my job done.
Yeah.
And Mother Duck,
it's a similar kind of pragmatism.
And our branding,
I think does a really good job of showing that.
I think so.
Well,
I asked you about half of what I was said,
I was looking forward to asking about,
which was the table schemas,
how to do that.
However,
what about indexes?
Sure.
I think indexes are a great question.
So DuckDB does support indexes,
but in many cases,
it's not necessarily something that you need.
And the reason for that is because of the workloads that it's best for,
but also because of columnar databases.
So when you have a columnar database,
by default,
it's going to create some rough indexes for you automatically.
So every about a hundred thousand rows in DuckDB,
we create an index there that says,
what's the minimum value in this chunk?
And then the maximum value in this chunk.
And what we'll do is then if you run a query that says select data from this
week,
we're going to check,
Hey,
which blocks have any data from this week?
And we can skip,
you know,
90% of your data because it's,
we know that it doesn't match that filter.
Right.
But that's not like an individual row index.
It's an index for every hundred thousand rows.
And it's for the analytical queries where you're looking at trends,
where you're analyzing large amounts of data,
it tends to be really the optimal way to go about it.
And that's the way most systems do it.
There is an external index you can add.
It's an art index and adaptive radix try index,
which is a pretty cool way of doing it.
It's a little different than the B tree in SQLite,
but it allows for those vast point lookups where if you want to grab one row,
you can get a very quick mapping to that individual row.
It tends to be just less necessary inductive B to do that.
But we have it if you need it.
I'm realizing that I need to learn more about databases,
especially columnar ones,
because they're not matching my mental model as,
as much as for,
say,
for relational or document ones.
it's definitely a different world.
And that's,
I think,
the fun of it is I think of databases as an infinitely deep rabbit hole of really just fun optimizations,
fun things to learn about.
So a lot of exciting stuff.
when you get that stuff right,
it's like magic.
It's like,
how could it possibly answer that so quickly?
At the same time,
when it's wrong,
it's really frustrating.
you go to a website and you'll say,
oh,
you know,
click this thing here.
And then you try to,
and it just sits there and spins like,
I know this has happened without an index.
And I know this could be so easily fixed.
And it's just not.
Why,
why is it so bad?
But,
you know,
you can make your stuff fast.
You can't make other people's stuff fast.
So I guess it's an advantage.
It makes you look good.
Yes.
So I think that the workloads are just so different,
but the mental model,
it does open,
open doors in a lot of ways.
So for example,
if you want to,
if you want to get the average of like a billion rows at DuckDB,
it's a couple seconds.
Wow.
It's that fast,
you know?
So just the things that you can do with that kind of tool,
an analytical oriented tool,
really unlocks things you can do in an application sense.
So data apps,
we think are a really interesting market for both DuckDB and MotherDuck,
where,
you know,
it's not just show me a little bit of data.
Maybe it's an event tracker,
like a fitness tracker.
You know,
I want to see the history of my bike rides for the last month.
And I want to see the trends,
my moving averages,
you know,
highlight the outliers for me.
You know,
there's a lot of,
of heavy analytical work to be done in data apps that an analytical database
is really good for.
Yeah.
Give us some,
I don't know how much you can share.
I know you interact with these customers quite a bit,
so you know,
but I don't know how much you can share.
Give us some senses of what people are doing.
Sure.
On the MotherDuck side or the DuckDB side?
Well,
you know,
give us a little example from,
from each,
maybe that's,
that you think is representative.
You bet.
I think,
um,
on the DuckDB side,
I think some of the,
the very interesting things are when you,
um,
use DuckDB as a data processing engine,
where each individual processing task is,
is,
you know,
one node,
but you're doing a ton of them in parallel.
So some companies will actually take DuckDB and use it to transform one parquet file into a,
uh,
an aggregated parquet file.
And they'll just set it up on a trigger.
So when a parquet file gets added,
they'll automatically just create a little pipeline with DuckDB and convert it into a much,
you know,
cleaner,
more aggregated form.
And you could do that at huge scale.
So some companies that are doing huge amounts of data processing,
you know,
with DuckDB,
um,
tons of tiny DuckDBs,
a flock of tiny DuckDBs,
uh,
running behind the scenes.
So that's an interesting use case that,
you know,
DuckDB originated as a data science tool,
but I think the data engineering side of,
of DuckDB is also very exciting.
where it fits really well in those pipelines.
Um,
on the mother duck side,
I think what we see is a lot of cases where the transactional database,
you know,
a lot of cases it's Postgres.
It's got a really friendly SQL syntax and it aligns very closely with DuckDB SQL syntax,
um,
where Postgres just is too slow for those kind of trend oriented aggregates or join queries that you want to run.
Uh,
and,
and mother duck ends up being a really great way to very easily get a lot more speed in those cases.
Uh,
and that could be speed for data engineering tasks.
Like some folks are running,
um,
uh,
data processing jobs with this tool called DBT stands for data build tool.
Um,
and it's a Python library and they were running these,
you know,
sets of,
of computation and aggregations and they would take,
you know,
eight hours.
And if it starts running,
you know,
2 AM by the time it,
it errors out,
you've,
you've lost your whole day of,
of your data analysis being up today.
Yeah.
You better get it right.
Right.
Better get it right.
Unfortunately,
DBT does also stand for,
you know,
uh,
behavioral therapy of a certain kind.
So it's,
uh,
you gotta search for DBT data.
Uh,
uh,
it's a tough acronym.
Uh,
yeah,
but it's a little short.
Yeah.
DBT Python.
That'll get you there too.
Yeah.
Um,
with,
with mother duck and,
and with duck DB,
you can take that.
And instead of being eight hours,
you can run it in,
you know,
15 or 30 minutes.
and just that scale of change,
um,
means that,
you know,
it's just a far more delightful experience to do those kinds of data pipelines on an analytical tool,
uh,
as opposed to a transaction.
So that's one.
The other one is,
is,
uh,
business intelligence tools.
In a lot of cases,
those start to get really slow on a transactional database,
because if you're looking at a graph,
it's by most of the time,
it's a trend.
And most of the time it's looking at a lot of data to,
to,
to plot.
Even if it's just plotting a few points,
it's looking at a lot of data to plot it.
And duck DB is really,
excellent for that.
And,
and mother duck as well.
There's actually a lot of business intelligence tools where they are powered by duck DB.
So,
uh,
mode,
I was acquired by hotspot.
They're,
they're powered by duck DB.
Um,
hex is a data science notebook.
They have duck DB as a part of their architecture.
Um,
there's a couple others.
We talked about some of the data types.
What about.
Jason or document type of things,
right?
Where you've got a little hierarchical data,
you know,
there's,
there's on one end of that spectrum,
we have manga DB.
That's all it does.
And on the other,
you've got relational databases like Postgres that say,
well,
this column can just be.
Jason arbitrary stuff.
Yes.
And we're in that space where we absolutely believe that's how most,
most things are a little bit of both.
So there is a full JSON data type in duck DB.
Uh,
and so you can store any arbitrary document in there and then process it with some really fast,
uh,
JSON processing.
we can also take JSON data and automatically split it out into columns.
If you want to unnest it.
So you can kind of go back and forth there.
There are also,
uh,
specific duck to be nested types.
If you want to enforce the typing at the column level,
but you want to be nested.
So you could say,
I know these are going to be my keys.
I know this will be my structure.
It,
you can store it all in one column,
uh,
and it'll be very,
very quick to,
to work with.
Um,
so you kind of have both,
you have the full,
full flexibility with JSON,
and then you also can,
can have nested types.
Can you query into them?
So if I have a JSON thing,
that's got like purchases and then it's got a bunch of purchase objects and then like values,
can I say,
give me the ones that have over a hundred dollar purchases?
You can do much like,
uh,
Postgres and SQLite have the ability to extract pieces of JSON.
Uh,
you know,
with the path syntax of like go to this path and pull that value out.
You absolutely can do that in DuckDB as well.
And say,
okay,
you know,
navigate to,
customer,
um,
the customer object and then inside the customer object,
go to this object.
And,
and,
um,
absolutely.
Yeah.
Super cool.
All right.
Well,
I think there's probably more to dive into,
honestly,
but,
uh,
but we've covered it.
I think we've covered it pretty well.
I,
I think DuckDB is super exciting for the possibilities that it opens up.
You know,
there might be a ton of people out there who haven't heard of it or really just heard of it in passing and didn't really know.
this in process stuff that you can do,
it really makes it quite accessible,
quite easy,
it lowers the bar to getting started,
right?
You don't have to understand connections,
security,
servers,
daemons,
all of that.
So I'm,
I'm excited for,
see where this goes.
It's already got a ton of traction.
So final call to action,
maybe tell people who are in that group,
what do they do?
You bet.
I think,
you know,
obviously,
pip install DuckDB,
give it a try.
It's,
it's,
it's anywhere you can use it.
MIT license,
it's,
it's really can fit anywhere that you're running Python.
a whole lot of other fun things you could do on top of it.
There's a new extension ecosystem.
So if it doesn't exist in DuckDB,
but you'd like it to,
you can actually build an extension for DuckDB in a variety of languages.
And,
and so we can,
we can all together make DuckDB into whatever we'd like.
So it's awesome.
Pretty neat.
Yeah.
Well,
good work.
And I love to see,
I love to see the,
the open source side and then maybe a strong company that's built around it in a way
that doesn't really undermine the open source value.
So MotherDuck,
DuckDB,
it looks like a really good relationship there.
So that's,
that's nice.
Yeah.
We even have two companies.
We got DuckDB Labs and MotherDuck.
Yeah,
that's right.
We got the foundational side as well.
Yeah.
Awesome.
Well,
Alex,
thanks for being on the show and yeah.
Thanks for sharing all this stuff with us.
It's great.
Thanks for having me.
Cheers,
folks.
Happy analyzing.
Yep.
Bye.
Thank you.